RALEE -- RNA alignment editor in Emacs
--------------------------------------

See the 00README file included with the RALEE distribution for
installation instructions.


Commands and shortcuts
----------------------

In addition to the standard emacs editing commands (C-x C-s to save
etc), RALEE includes some commands to edit and markup alignments of
structured RNAs.  

M-x means "hold down alt and press x", or "press Escape then x" on
sensible systems; C-c means "hold down Ctrl and press c".  The full
command is on the left with the shortcut on the right.

Most commands can be run from the menus, so exploration there is a
great way to learn what does what.


Movement
--------

   M-x jump-right				C-right
   M-x jump-left				C-left
   M-x jump-up					C-up
   M-x jump-down				C-down

     Control-arrow keys scroll the alignment a page at a time in all
     directions.

   M-x jump-to-pair				C-c C-p
   M-x jump-to-pair-in-other-window		C-c C-o

   M-x center-on-point                          C-l


Editing
-------

   M-x insert-gap				.
   M-x delete-gap				C-d
   M-x insert-gap-column			C-c C-i
   M-x delete-gap-column			C-c C-d
   M-x delete-all-gap-columns

   M-x shift-sequence-left                      C-,
   M-x shift-sequence-right                     C-.

     shift-sequence-(left|right) pushes the sequence, removing and
     inserting gaps to leave the rest of the sequence alone.  This is a
     core editing move which you should be using often!

   M-x throw-sequence-left                      C-<
   M-x throw-sequence-right                     C->

     throw-sequence-(left|right) do the same as shift methods, but
     pushing the sequence as far as it will go (until it hits another
     sequence chunk).

   M-x trim-left
   M-x trim-right

     Remove columns of the alignment to the left or right of the
     cursor.

   M-x uppercase-alignment
   M-x lowercase-alignment
   M-x t-to-u
   M-x u-to-t
   M-x gap-to-dot

     Some functions assume that gap characters are represented by '.'s
     so you may be wise to convert all gaps to '.'s using this
     function.

   M-x unblock-alignment

     unblock-alignment takes a blocked Stockholm alignment file and
     unblocks it, saving the original file with a .bak extension.
     This function is not well tested -- beware that your data may get
     corrupted.

   M-x make-flush-alignment

     Pad the right end of each sequence with gaps characters to make
     it flush.


Painting
--------

   M-x paint-buffer-by-ss			C-c C-b
   M-x paint-buffer-by-cons			C-c C-c
   M-x paint-buffer-by-base			C-c C-v
   M-x paint-buffer-by-current-ss-line		C-c C-n

     Show color mark-up based on the secondary structure and
     conservation.

   M-x paint-buffer-by-compensatory-changes	C-c C-x

     Show compensatory base changes with respect to the first sequence
     in the alignment.  Colors:
     	green        double compatible substitution
	light-green  single compatible substitution
	red	     double incompatible substitution
	orange	     single incompatible substitution
	magenta      base involving a gap symbol

   M-x paint-char                               C-#

     paint-char allows you to add temporary colour mark-up by hand.
     The changes disappear next time yuo paint by any other method.

   M-x toggle-highlight-current-line            C-c C-h

     Highlight the current line in bold.


Blocks
------

   M-x define-block                             C-\
   M-x undefine-block                           C-c C-\

     Define blocks of sequence to perform other actions on.
     Define the top left corner of the block with C-space, and the
     bottom right with the define-block function.

   M-x unalign-block

     Unalign the residues in the current block, pushing them left,
     right, to the center, or to the edges.


Helper applications
-------------------

   M-x fold-sequence				C-c C-f

     fold-sequence calculates and adds secondary structure markup for
     a given sequence in a #=GR line.  This assumes that you have
     ViennaRNA (http://www.tbi.univie.ac.at/~ivo/RNA/) installed and
     that RNAfold is on your path.

   M-x fold-all-sequences
   M-x fold-sequence-block

     fold-sequence-block folds only the subsequences defined in the
     current block.  This is mostly useful for folding single helices
     in one or more sequences.

   M-x show-structure-ps

     show-structure-ps requires ViennaRNA and gv to be on your path.

   M-x remove-all-gr-lines

     Remove all the #=GR lines that fold-sequence methods add.


Output
------

   M-x write-ps
   M-x page-setup

     write-ps dumps a postscript file of your alignment, complete with
     the current colour markup.  page-setup allows you to choose things
     like fontsize, page orientation etc.


Minor modes
-----------

   M-x protect-mode

     protect-mode protects the alignment from inadvertant insertion or
     deletion.  The delete and backspace keys are reconfigured to only
     allow deletion of gaps.  Keys that normally insert
     letters/numbers/symbols are disabled.

   M-x highlight-current-line-mode

     Not strictly a minor mode, but hey.  highlight-current-line-mode
     allows you to switch off the behaviour that a left mouse click
     highlights a sequence.  This is useful if you want to use a font
     which looks bad in bold.


Misc
----

   Changing font size:
     - GNU Emacs: hold down shift and left click for a font menu
     - XEmacs: use the Options menu (which has disappeared in
       ralee-mode - doh!)



---
SGJ
